Video that explains "You are not the body, you are not thr kind" {
   (Just as sadhguru sais)

   Name: 
   Link: https://youtu.be/j2qp-d1Ys58
   (video subtitles below)
}


Video subtitles (downloaded from Google Playstore > ccTUBE app) {

   Title: "Nithyananda: How to wake up without coffee in the morning"

   One of my Guru's, Annamalai Swami.

   In course of conversation he told me that we are not the body. We are beyond pain and suffering.

   When I was sitting alone and contemplating about it, "we are are not the body, we are beyond pain and suffereing," what does he mean by it?

   I actually experimented, I took a knife and cut my thigh to see.

   Whether we have pain or not. Of course, I had pain and was taken to hospital.

   Stitches were done and all that has happened.

   But I could not think what my guru had uttered was lie.

   I was continuously contemplating. I had a yoga guru, he was also a Paramahamsa.

   One day he explained, he usually comes to the house where I was born and brought up.

   He will come home early morning, 4 o'clock, and drag me out of bed and take me to the temple and teach yoga. I was a kid.

   Sometimes the moment I am out of bed he will make me drink coffee, so that i will not go back to bed.

   One day he was telling....

   See before coffee how you feel, that you want to lie down, and nothing other than sleep matters. Just a cup of coffee you are ready to listen to me.

   And suddenly I become more important, yoga becomes more important.

   All the ideas that you should do yoga makes more sense

   Without a cup of coffee all the ideas that you should sleep makes more sense.

   Just with a cup of coffee, all the ideas that you should do yoga and take care of your health, build your body, so you can get enlightened.

   All these ideas makes sense

   He made a very important statement which I want to translate in English for all of you.

   He said...

   The physiological, psychological, neurological effect on you, is not you.

   Please understand

   One guru made a statement, "you are not the body."

   The other guru made a statement, "the physiological, psychological, neurological effects happening on you is not you!"

   How many of you clicked with that second statement?

   Actually both statements finally mean the same. But the second statement suddenly made so much sense to me!

   Yes.

   Please understand, because I could see my seeking is not just equal to a cup of coffee.

   But....

   A cup of coffee can make such a big impact, it can just drive away the sleep.

   Make the whole yoga happen in me. With enthusiasm, excitement.

   So when I was analyzing, a cup of coffee cannot be equal unto my seeking.

   Or equal unto me.

   Understand, the idea he conveyed to me, my yoga guru is....

   Whether you have the feeling sleeping is more important, that is my first priority.

   I don't care about anything else.

   Or, you feel no, after a cup of coffee, the thought current, no I have to be doing, this has to be done for my enlightenment.

   For my growth.

   Whether you have this thought current before cup of coffee, or thought current after cup of coffee.

   Both thought currents does not matter

   Both thought currents are not you.

   Both thought currents are empowered by you, not you.

   That is what the master, my first guru means, Annamalai Swami means, you are not the body, you are not the mind.

   When Annamalai Swami told me "You are not the body, you are not the mind. You are beyond pain and suffering."

   The statement did not make sense for me

   But when my yoga guru explained, physiological psychological happenings are not you.

   It really made sense

   Actually, when I had the click,

   Oh! Psychological, physiological, neurological effects happening on me is not me I tell you...

   From the next day I didn't need coffee to wake me up.

   The understanding physiological, psychological effects happening on me is not me. Liberated me!

   Not only from coffee, after that never ever I understand something called low mood or depression or not feeling well or stressed I tell you

   All these words are really strange still I'm not able to comprehend those words

   When people come and tell me I really feel bad for them

   But I feel 'oh God I'm not able to grasp what they mean by this word.'

   All those words have no meaning in my life

   Because to such a clear understanding
}
