The Upanishads (“In the world, there is no study so beautiful and so elevating as the
Upanishads. It has been the solace of my life, and will be the solace of my death,” from the great
nineteenth-century German philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer, paying homage to the sublime
ideas that have been animating the Hindu tradition for almost three millennia. In the Upanishads,
those majestic “Himalayas of the Soul,” we discover the pan-Indian diagnosis of the human
condition as trapped in a ceaseless round of death and rebirth (samsara), due to the consequences
of actions (karma) performed in ignorance of the divine ground of all life, the Infinite, the Pure
Being (Brahman). We also hear of the path and prescription (yoga) for liberation (moksha) from
this confirming ignorance through each individual’s realization of his or her inner spiritual
nature, the Universal Self (Atman or Purusha), which is none other than Brahman. The Sanskrit
word “upanishad,” literally means, “setting down beside,” referring to setting ignorance to rest
and revealing wisdom. Among the oldest sacred texts of Hinduism, dating back to the 8 century
th
B.C.E., the Upanishads are made up of the following books, Aitareya, Brihadaranyaka,
Chandogya, Isa, Katha, Kena, Mandukya, Mundaka, Prasna, Svetasvatara, and Taittiriya.
Source: Phillip Novak. The World’s Wisdom. Edison, NJ: Castle Books. 1994:9. The following
selected texts are a translation by Swami Nikhilananda.)
Isa Upanishad (See All Beings in Your Own Self and Your Self in All Beings. While one of the
shortest of the Upanishads [18 verses] and in poem form, the Isa is one of the most often quoted
Upanishad. “Isa” refers to “inner ruler.”)
1 All this – whatever exists in this changing universe – should be covered by the Lord. Protect
the Self by renunciation. Lust not after any man's wealth.
2 If a man wishes to live a hundred years on this earth, he should live performing action. For you,
who cherish such a desire and regard yourself as a man, there is no other way by which you can
keep work from clinging to you.
3 Verily, those worlds of the asuras (power-seeking spirit beings presiding over moral and social
phenomena) are enveloped in blind darkness; and thereto they all repair after death who are
slayers of Atman.
4 That non-dual Atman, though never stirring, is swifter than the mind. The senses cannot reach
It, for It moves ever in front. Though standing still, It overtakes others who are running. Because
of Atman, Vayu, the World Soul apportions the activities of all.
5 It moves and moves not; It is far and likewise near. It is inside all this and It is outside all this.
6 The wise man beholds all beings in the Self and the Self in all beings; for that reason he does
not hate anyone.
7 To the seer, all things have verily become the Self: what delusion, what sorrow, can there be
for him who beholds that oneness?
8 It is He who pervades all – He who is bright and bodiless, without scar or sinews, pure and by
evil unpierced; who is the Seer, omniscient, transcendent and uncreated. He has duly allotted to
the eternal World – Creators their respective duties.
Katha Upanishad Part 1 Chapters 1 and 2 (Seeking Wisdom from the King of Death, Atman –
the Universal Self, and OM – the Sound of the Real. “Katha” refers to “death as teacher.” With
some parallels with the Bhagavad Gita and one of the oldest of Upanishads, the Katha contains
the famous story of Nachiketa, an earnest young yogi who ventures to the abode of Yama, the
The Upanishads 2
God of Death, in order to learn from him the wisdom of life. Nachiketa arrives while Yama is
away on business and spends three nights alone in his dwelling. Upon arriving, Yama apologizes
for the inconvenience and offers Nachiketas three compensatory boons. Nachiketa’s first wish is
that his father suffer no anxiety about him and recognize him upon his return. His second wish is
to know the secrets of the fire sacrifice. Then Yama tells Nachiketa, “Choose now thy third
boon.” And Nachiketa replies:)
20 Nachiketa said: There is this doubt about a man when he is dead: Some say that he exists;
others, that he does not. This I should like to know, taught by you. This is the third of my boons.
21 Yama said: On this subject even the gods formerly had their doubts. It is not easy to
understand: the nature of Atman is subtle. Choose another boon, O Nachiketa! Do not press me.
Release me from that boon.
22 Nachiketa said: O Death, even the gods have their doubts about this subject; and you have
declared it to be not easy to understand. But another teacher like you cannot be found and surely
no other boon is comparable to this.
23 Yama said: Choose sons and grandsons who shall live a hundred years; choose elephants,
horses, herds of cattle and gold. Choose a vast domain on earth; live here as many years as you
desires.
24 If you deem any other boon equal to that, choose it; choose wealth and a long life. Be the
king, O Nachiketa, of the wide earth. I will make you the enjoyer of all desires.
25 Whatever desires are difficult to satisfy in this world of mortals, choose them as you wish:
these fair maidens, with their chariots and musical instruments – men cannot obtain them. I give
them to you and they shall wait upon you. But do not ask me about death.
26 Nachiketa said: But, O Death, these endure only till tomorrow. Furthermore, they exhaust the
vigour of all the sense organs. Even the longest life is short indeed. Keep your horses, dances and
songs for yourself.
27 Wealth can never make a man happy. Moreover, since I have beheld you, I shall certainly
obtain wealth; I shall also live as long as you rule. Therefore no boon will be accepted by me but
the one that I have asked.
28 Who among decaying mortals here below, having approached the undecaying immortals and
coming to know that his higher needs may be fulfilled by them, would exult in a life over long,
after he had pondered on the pleasures arising from beauty and song?
29 Tell me, O Death, of that Great Hereafter about which a man has his doubts.
Chapter 2
1 Yama said: The good is one thing; the pleasant, another. Both of these, serving different needs,
bind a man. It goes well with him who, of the two, takes the good; but he who chooses the
pleasant misses the end.
The Upanishads 3
2 Both the good and the pleasant present themselves to a man. The calm soul examines them well
and discriminates. Yea, he prefers the good to the pleasant; but the fool chooses the pleasant out
of greed and avarice.
3 O Nachiketa, after pondering well the pleasures that are or seem to he delightful, you have
renounced them all. You have not taken the road abounding in wealth, where many men sink.
4 Wide apart and leading to different ends are these two: ignorance and what is known as
Knowledge. I regard you, O Nachiketa, to be one who desires Knowledge; for even many
pleasures could not tempt you away.
5 Fools dwelling in darkness, but thinking themselves wise and erudite, go round and round, by
various tortuous paths, like the blind led by the blind.
6 The Hereafter never reveals itself to a person devoid of discrimination, heedless and perplexed
by the delusion of wealth. "This world alone exists," he thinks, "and there is no other." Again and
again he comes under my sway.
7 Many there are who do not even hear of Atman; though hearing of Him, many do not
comprehend. Wonderful is the expounder and rare the hearer; rare indeed is the experiencer of
Atman taught by an able preceptor.
8 Atman, when taught by an inferior person, is not easily comprehended, because It is diversely
regarded by disputants. But when It is taught by him who has become one with Atman, there can
remain no more doubt about It. Atman is subtler than the subtlest and not to be known through
argument.
9 This Knowledge cannot be attained by reasoning. Atman become easy of comprehension, O
dearest, when taught by another. You have attained this Knowledge now. You are, indeed, a man
of true resolve. May we always have an inquirer like you!
10 Yama said: I know that the treasure resulting from action is not eternal; for what is eternal
cannot be obtained by the non-eternal. Yet I have performed the Nachiketa sacrifice with the help
of non-eternal things and attained this position which is only relatively eternal.
11 The fulfilment of desires, the foundation of the universe, the rewards of sacrifices, the shore
where there is no fear, that which adorable and great, the wide abode and the goal – all this you
have seen; and being wise, you have with firm resolve discarded everything.
12 The wise man who, by means of concentration on the Self, realizes that ancient, effulgent
One, who is hard to be seen, unmanifest, hidden and who dwells in the buddhi (feminine Sanskrit
for “transpersonal faculty of the mind”) and rests in the body – he, indeed, leaves joy and sorrow
far behind.
15 Yama said: The goal which all the Vedas declare, which all austerities aim at and which men
desire when they lead the life of continence, I will tell you briefly: it is Om (the four phoneme
mantra, “Aum . . .”).
16 This syllable Om is indeed Brahman. This syllable is the Highest. Whosoever knows this
syllable obtains all that he desires.
Katha Upanishad Part 1 Chapter 3 (The Path of Liberation Is as Narrow as a Razor’s Edge;
William Somerset Maugham opens his novel, The Razor's Edge, with the following quote: “The
sharp edge of a razor is difficult to pass over; the wise say the path to Salvation is hard”)
The Upanishads 4
10-11 Beyond the senses are the objects; beyond the objects is the mind; beyond the mind, the
intellect; beyond the intellect, the Great Atman; beyond the Great Atman, the Unmanifest; beyond
the Unmanifest, the Purusha. Beyond the Purusha (Universal Self) there is nothing: this is the
end, the Supreme Goal.
12 That Self hidden in all beings does not shine forth; but It is seen by subtle seers through their
one – pointed and subtle intellects.
13 The wise man should merge his speech in his mind and his mind in his intellect. He should
merge his intellect in the Cosmic Mind and the Cosmic Mind in the Tranquil Self.
14 Arise! Awake! Approach the great and learn. Like the sharp edge of a razor is that path, so the
wise say – hard to tread and difficult to cross.
15 Having realized Atman, which is soundless, intangible, formless, undecaying and likewise
tasteless, eternal and odorless; having realized That which is without beginning and end, beyond
the Great and unchanging – one is freed from the jaws of death.
Katha Upanishad Part 2 Chapter 1 (Who Sees the Many and Not the One Wanders On from
Death to Death)
4 It is through Atman that one perceives all objects in sleep or in the waking state. Having
realized the vast, all-pervading Atman, the calm soul does not grieve.
10 What is here, the same is there and what is there, the same is here. He goes from death to
death who sees any difference here.
11 By the mind alone is Brahman to be realized; then one does not see in It any multiplicity
whatsoever. He goes from death to death who sees multiplicity in It. This, verily, is That.
14 As rainwater falling on a mountain peak runs down the rocks in all directions, even so he who
sees the attributes as different from Brahman verily runs after them in all directions.
15 As pure water poured into pure water becomes one with it, so also, O Gautama, does the Self
of the sage who knows.
Katha Upanishad Part 2 Chapter 2 (Eternal Brahman: Unmanifest Source of All
Manifestation)
8 He, the Purusha (Universal Self), who remains awake while the sense – organs are asleep,
shaping one lovely form after another, that indeed is the Pure, that is Brahman and that alone is
called the Immortal. All worlds are contained in Him and none can pass beyond. This, verily, is
That.
9 As the same non-dual fire, after it has entered the world, becomes different according to
whatever it burns, so also the same non-dual Atman, dwelling in all beings, becomes different
according to whatever It enters. And It exists also without.
10 As the same non-dual air, after it has entered the world, becomes different according to
whatever it enters, so also the same non-dual Atman, dwelling in all beings, becomes different
according to whatever It enters. And It exists also without.
The Upanishads 5
11 As the sun, which helps all eyes to see, is not affected by the blemishes of the eyes or of the
external things revealed by it, so also the one Atman, dwelling in all beings, is never
contaminated by the misery of the world, being outside it.
12 There is one Supreme Ruler, the inmost Self of all beings, who makes His one form manifold.
Eternal happiness belongs to the wise, who perceive Him within themselves – not to others.
13 There is One who is the eternal Reality among non-eternal objects, the one truly conscious
Entity among conscious objects and who, though non-dual, fulfils the desires of many. Eternal
peace belongs to the wise, who perceive Him within themselves – not to others.
Katha Upanishad Part 2 Chapter 3 (Roots Above, Branches Below)
1 This is that eternal Asvattha Tree (Holy Fig Tree of Eternity) with its root above and branches
below. That root, indeed, is called the Bright; That is Brahman and That alone is the Immortal. In
That all worlds are contained and none can pass beyond. This, verily, is That.
Katha Upanishad Part 2 Chapter 3 (Yoga and Immortality)
10 When the five instruments (senses) of knowledge stand still, together with the mind and when
the intellect does not move, that is called the Supreme State.
11 This, the firm Control of the senses, is what is called yoga. One must then be vigilant; for
yoga can be both beneficial and injurious.
12 Atman cannot be attained by speech, by the mind, or by the eye. How can It be realized in any
other way than by the affirmation of him who says: "He is"?
13 He is to be realized first as Existence limited by upadhis (material body, senses, energy) and
then in His true transcendental nature. Of these two aspects, Atman realized as Existence leads
the knower to the realization of His true nature.
14 When all the desires that dwell in the heart fall away, then the mortal becomes immortal and
here attains Brahman.
15 When all the ties of the heart are severed here on earth, then the mortal becomes immortal.
This much alone is the teaching.
16 There are one hundred and one arteries of the heart, one of which pierces the crown of the
head. Going upward by it, a man at death attains immortality. But when his prana (“breath,”
one’s life force) passes out by other arteries, going in different directions, then he is reborn in the
world.
17 The Purusha (Atman), not larger than a thumb, the inner Self, always dwells in the hearts of
men. Let a man separate Him from his body with steadiness, as one separates the tender stalk
from a blade of grass. Let him know that Self as the Bright, as the Immortal – yea, as the Bright,
as the Immortal.
18 Having received this wisdom taught by the King of Death and the entire process of yoga,
Nachiketa became free from impurities and death and attained Brahman. Thus it will be also with
any other who knows, in this manner, the inmost Self.
The Upanishads 6
Chandogya Upanishad Part 6 Chapter 1, 9, 10, 24 and 25 (“Chandogya” refers to “song and
sacrifice,” and is considered one of the primary Upanishads, as well as one of the oldest. In this
selection, the priestly Aruna tells his son Svetaketu a series of parables about the non-duality of
the Self, the absence of individuality, and the nature of the Pure Being and the Infinite, of
Brahman/Atman)
Chapter 1 4-6. "Just as, my dear, by one clod of clay all that is made of clay is known, the
modification being only a name, arising from speech, while the truth is that all is clay; "Just as,
my dear, by one nugget of gold all that is made of gold is known, the modification being only a
name, arising from speech, while the truth is that all is gold; "And just as, my dear, by one pair of
nail – scissors all that is made of iron is known, the modification being only a name, arising from
speech, while the truth is that all is iron – even so, my dear, is that instruction."
Chapter 9 1-2. "As bees, my dear, make honey by collecting the juices of trees located at
different places and reduce them to one form, "And as these juices have no discrimination so as
to be able to say: ‘I am the juice of this tree,’ or ‘I am the juice of that tree’ – even so, indeed, my
dear, all these creatures, though they reach Pure Being (Brahman), do not know that they have
reached Pure Being.
3. "Whatever these creatures are, here in this world – a tiger, a lion, a wolf, a boar, a worm, a fly,
a gnat, or a mosquito – that they become again.
Chapter 10 1-2. "These rivers, my dear, flow – the eastern toward the east and the western
toward the west. They arise from the sea and flow into the sea. Just as these rivers, while they are
in the sea, do not know: ‘I am this river’ or ‘I am that river,’ "Even so, my dear, all these
creatures, even though they have come from Pure Being, do not know that they have come from
Pure Being. Whatever these creatures are, here in this world – a tiger, a lion, a wolf a boar, a
worm, a fly, a gnat, or a mosquito – that they become again.
Chapter 24 1. "Where one sees nothing else, hears nothing else, understands nothing else – that
is the Infinite (Brahman). Where one sees something else, hears something else, understands
something else – that is the finite. The Infinite is immortal, the finite mortal." "Venerable Sir, in
what does the Infinite find Its support?" "In Its own greatness – or not even in greatness."
2. "Here on earth people describe cows and horses, elephants and gold, slaves and wives, fields
and houses, as ‘greatness.’ I do not mean this," he said, "for in such cases one thing finds its
support in another. But what I say is:
Chapter 25 1. "That Infinite, indeed, is below. It is above. It is behind. It is before. It is to the
south. It is to the north. The Infinite, indeed, is all this. "Next follows the instruction about the
Infinite with reference to ‘I’: I, indeed, am below. I am above. I am behind. I am before. I am
to the south. I am to the north. I am, indeed, all this.
2. "Next follows the instruction about the Infinite with reference to the Self (Atman): The Self
indeed, is below. It is above. It is behind. It is before. It is to the south. It is to the north. The Self,
The Upanishads 7
indeed, is all this. "Verily, he who sees this, reflects on this and understands this delights in the
Self sports with the Self, rejoices in the Self revels in the Self. Even while living in the body he
becomes a self – ruler. He wields unlimited freedom in all the worlds. ‘‘But those who think
differently from this have others for their rulers they live in perishable worlds. They have no
freedom in all the worlds."
